Let's look at another step in the optimization that can be made more computationally
efficient and that may be necessary to make the computation feasible.
Recall that this is the formula for the factor model of portfolio variance.
In particular, let's focus on the part of
the portfolio variance that is explained by the risk factors.
This is the factor variance matrix wrapped on both sides by
the factor exposure matrices which is then surrounded by the portfolio holdings vectors.
Let's take a look at the shape of the matrices particularly the ones in the middle,
which are the factor exposure matrix and the factor variance matrix.
The factor exposure matrix has a row for each of the n assets.
So it's very tall.
Similarly, its transpose is very wide.
Note that when we multiply the three matrices together,
this forms a very large covariance matrix of n rows by n columns,
where n is the number of assets.
If we have 2,000 stocks in the stock universe,
this is a 2,000 by 2,000 matrix.
You could very well be waiting hours to run
the optimization or end up with memory overflow.
If we go back and take another look at the matrices and their shapes,
can you think of some way to avoid creating the n by n covariance matrix?